README.md, before:

# Fortress

[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/alexweissman/UserFrosting](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/alexweissman/UserFrosting?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

[![Click here to lend your support to: UserFrosting: A secure, modern user management system for PHP and make a donation at pledgie.com !](https://pledgie.com/campaigns/29583.png?skin_name=chrome)](https://pledgie.com/campaigns/29583)

### By [Alex Weissman](https://alexanderweissman.com)

Copyright (c) 2015-2016

A schema-driven system for elegant whitelisting, transformation and validation of user input on both the client and server sides from a unified set of rules.

## Introduction

Data from the outside world is the Achilles' heel of modern interactive web services and applications.  Code injection, cross-site scripting (XSS), CSRF, and many other types of malicious attacks are successful when a web application accepts user input that it shouldn't have, or fails to neutralize the damaging parts of the input.  Even non-malicious users can inadvertently submit something that breaks your web service, causing it to behave in some unexpected way.

For the sake of both security and quality user experience, it is important for a web developer to do two things:

1. Decide exactly what type of input your application should accept, and;
2. Decide how your application should behave when it receives something that violates those rules.

Sounds simple, right?  Unfortunately, even experienced developers often slip up, allowing a malicious user to execute SQL or PHP on the application's server (or, in the case of XSS and CSRF attacks, allow a user to trick *other users* into executing malicious code).

Part of the problem is that this kind of filtering must be done at every point in the application where the user can submit raw data to the server.  A modern web application might accept hundreds of different types of POST requests, and it can become extremely tedious to code the rules for each request manually.  Much of this work must also be done on both the client side (for user experience) and the server side (for security).

Fortress solves this problem by providing a uniform interface for validating raw user input on both the client side (in Javascript) and on the server side (in PHP) using a single unified set of rules.  All you have to do is create a **request schema**, which defines what fields you're expecting the user to submit, and [rules](https://github.com/alexweissman/wdvss) for how to handle the contents of those fields.  For example, you might want to check that an email address is well-formed.  The request schema, which is simply a JSON document, makes it easy to manipulate these rules in one place.

The request schema can be applied on the server side to received request data, but also be transformed to formats compatible with client-side validation libraries such as [the jQuery Validation plugin](https://jqueryvalidation.org/), making it easy to perform client- and server-side validation without having to write every rule twice.

An example request schema, written using the [WDVSS standard](https://github.com/alexweissman/wdvss):

**schema.json**

```
{
    "user_name" : {
        "validators" : {
            "length" : {
                "min" : 1,
                "max" : 50,
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_USER_CHAR_LIMIT"
            },
            "required" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_SPECIFY_USERNAME"
            }
        }       
    },    
    "email" : {
        "validators" : {
            "required" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_SPECIFY_EMAIL"
            },
            "length" : {
                "min" : 1,
                "max" : 150,
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_EMAIL_CHAR_LIMIT"
            },
            "email" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_INVALID_EMAIL"
            }
        }
    },
    "message" : {
        "default" : "My message", 
        "transformations" : ["trim"]
    },
    "password" : {
        "validators" : {
            "required" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_SPECIFY_PASSWORD"
            },
            "matches" : {
                "field" : "passwordc",
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_PASS_MISMATCH"
            },            
            "length" : {
                "min" : 8,
                "max" : 50,
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_PASS_CHAR_LIMIT"
            }
        } 
    },
    "passwordc" : {
        "validators" : {
            "required" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_SPECIFY_PASSWORD"
            },
            "matches" : {
                "field" : "password",
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_PASS_MISMATCH"
            },
            "length" : {
                "min" : 8,
                "max" : 50,
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_PASS_CHAR_LIMIT"
            }
        }  
    }
}
```

## Dependencies

- PHP 5.4+
- [Valitron (server-side validation)](https://github.com/vlucas/valitron)
- [HTML Purifier](https://github.com/ezyang/htmlpurifier)

## Installation

### To install with composer:

1. If you haven't already, get [Composer](http://getcomposer.org/) and [install it](https://getcomposer.org/doc/00-intro.md#installation-linux-unix-osx) - preferably, globally.
2. Require Fortress, either by running `php composer.phar require alexweissman/fortress`, or by creating a `composer.json` file:

```
{
    "require": {
        "php": ">=5.4.0",
        "userfrosting/fortress": "2.0"
    }
}
```

and running `composer install`.

3. Include the `vendor/autoload.php` file in your project.  For an example of how this can be done, see `fortress/config-fortress.php`.

## Usage

### Translator object

Fortress requires a `MessageTranslator` (see [i18n](https://github.com/userfrosting/i18n)) object to translate message tokens that may appear in rules:

```
// Create a message translator
$translator = new UserFrosting\I18n\MessageTranslator();
// Set the translation paths
$translator->setTranslationTable("locale/en_US.php");
$translator->setDefaultTable("locale/en_US.php");
```

### Request schema

Then, you can load a JSON schema file containing the rules.  For example, the `schema.json` file we demonstrated above:

```
// Load the request schema
$schema = new UserFrosting\Fortress\RequestSchema("schema/forms/register.json");
```

You can add additional validation rules to a schema at runtime, if you wish:

```
$schema->addValidator("puppies", "required");

$schema->addValidator("minions", "range", [
    "min" => 0,
    "max" => 20,
    "message" => "Not enough minions"
]);

$schema->addValidator("email", "length", [
    "min" => 1,
    "max" => 100,
    "message" => "ACCOUNT_EMAIL_CHAR_LIMIT"
]);
```

### Data transformation

The data transformer performs the following tasks:

1. Whitelisting of input array against the schema.  By default, any parameters not listed in the schema will be filtered out.  Other options are "error" and "skip".
2. Perform a series of transformations on the input data.  For example, `trim` or `purify`.
3. Set any default values for fields in the schema which are not present in the input array.


```
$post = [
    "puppies" => "<script>I'm definitely really a puppy  </script>0  ",
    "horses" => "seven pretty horses"
];

$transformer = new \UserFrosting\Fortress\RequestDataTransformer($schema);

// Transform, and print transformed data for demo purposes
$transformedData = $transformer->transform($post, "skip");

echo "<h2>Transformed data</h2>";
echo "<pre>";
print_r($transformedData);
echo "</pre>";
```

### Server-side data validation

When processing a POST request, for example, you should create a `ServerSideValidator` object with the schema.  Then, call `validate` on the input array.  `validate` will return false if any of the rules are failed.  Call `errors` to get the list of generated error messages.  You might want to store these error messages to a flash messaging system so they can be shown to the user.

```
$validator = new \UserFrosting\Fortress\ServerSideValidator($schema, $translator);

if (!$validator->validate($transformedData)) {
    echo "<h2>Validation results</h2>";
    echo "<pre>";
    print_r($validator->errors());
    echo "</pre>";
}
```

### Client-side data validation

When generating a page or form, you will use one of the `Adapter` classes to generate a compatible set of rules from your WDVSS schema:

```
// Test client validators
$clientVal = new \UserFrosting\Fortress\Adapter\JqueryValidationAdapter($schema, $translator);
echo "<h2>Client-side validation schema (JSON)</h2>";
echo "<pre>";
print_r($clientVal->rules());
echo "</pre>";
```

### Message tokens

The `message` for a rule can be either a plain string, or a [translatable message token](https://github.com/userfrosting/i18n).

In the definitions of translatable message tokens, the keyword "self" is reserved to refer to the name of the field being validated.  Thus, a message like this:

"MIN_LENGTH" => "The field '{{self}}' must be at least {{min}} characters long"

for a field defined as:

```
"tagline": {
    "validators" : {
        "length" : {
            "min" : 10,
            "message" : "MIN_LENGTH"
        }
    }
}
```

Would translate to:

 "The field 'tagline' must be at least 10 characters long"
 
 ## TODO
 
 - phpunit tests

Commit message:

Add "domain" property to address #6

README.md, after:

# Fortress

[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/alexweissman/UserFrosting](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/alexweissman/UserFrosting?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

[![Click here to lend your support to: UserFrosting: A secure, modern user management system for PHP and make a donation at pledgie.com !](https://pledgie.com/campaigns/29583.png?skin_name=chrome)](https://pledgie.com/campaigns/29583)

### By [Alex Weissman](https://alexanderweissman.com)

Copyright (c) 2015-2016

A schema-driven system for elegant whitelisting, transformation and validation of user input on both the client and server sides from a unified set of rules.

## Introduction

Data from the outside world is the Achilles' heel of modern interactive web services and applications.  Code injection, cross-site scripting (XSS), CSRF, and many other types of malicious attacks are successful when a web application accepts user input that it shouldn't have, or fails to neutralize the damaging parts of the input.  Even non-malicious users can inadvertently submit something that breaks your web service, causing it to behave in some unexpected way.

For the sake of both security and quality user experience, it is important for a web developer to do two things:

1. Decide exactly what type of input your application should accept, and;
2. Decide how your application should behave when it receives something that violates those rules.

Sounds simple, right?  Unfortunately, even experienced developers often slip up, allowing a malicious user to execute SQL or PHP on the application's server (or, in the case of XSS and CSRF attacks, allow a user to trick *other users* into executing malicious code).

Part of the problem is that this kind of filtering must be done at every point in the application where the user can submit raw data to the server.  A modern web application might accept hundreds of different types of POST requests, and it can become extremely tedious to code the rules for each request manually.  Much of this work must also be done on both the client side (for user experience) and the server side (for security).

Fortress solves this problem by providing a uniform interface for validating raw user input on both the client side (in Javascript) and on the server side (in PHP) using a single unified set of rules.  All you have to do is create a **request schema**, which defines what fields you're expecting the user to submit, and [rules](https://github.com/alexweissman/wdvss) for how to handle the contents of those fields.  For example, you might want to check that an email address is well-formed.  The request schema, which is simply a JSON document, makes it easy to manipulate these rules in one place.

The request schema can be applied on the server side to received request data, but also be transformed to formats compatible with client-side validation libraries such as [the jQuery Validation plugin](https://jqueryvalidation.org/), making it easy to perform client- and server-side validation without having to write every rule twice.

An example request schema, written using the [WDVSS standard](https://github.com/alexweissman/wdvss):

**schema.json**

```
{
    "user_name" : {
        "validators" : {
            "length" : {
                "min" : 1,
                "max" : 50,
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_USER_CHAR_LIMIT"
            },
            "required" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_SPECIFY_USERNAME"
            }
        }       
    },    
    "email" : {
        "validators" : {
            "required" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_SPECIFY_EMAIL"
            },
            "length" : {
                "min" : 1,
                "max" : 150,
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_EMAIL_CHAR_LIMIT"
            },
            "email" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_INVALID_EMAIL"
            }
        }
    },
    "message" : {
        "default" : "My message", 
        "transformations" : ["trim"]
    },
    "password" : {
        "validators" : {
            "required" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_SPECIFY_PASSWORD"
            },
            "matches" : {
                "field" : "passwordc",
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_PASS_MISMATCH"
            },            
            "length" : {
                "min" : 8,
                "max" : 50,
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_PASS_CHAR_LIMIT"
            }
        } 
    },
    "passwordc" : {
        "validators" : {
            "required" : {
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_SPECIFY_PASSWORD"
            },
            "matches" : {
                "field" : "password",
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_PASS_MISMATCH"
            },
            "length" : {
                "min" : 8,
                "max" : 50,
                "message" : "ACCOUNT_PASS_CHAR_LIMIT"
            }
        }  
    }
}
```

## Dependencies

- PHP 5.4+
- [Valitron (server-side validation)](https://github.com/vlucas/valitron)
- [HTML Purifier](https://github.com/ezyang/htmlpurifier)

## Installation

### To install with composer:

1. If you haven't already, get [Composer](http://getcomposer.org/) and [install it](https://getcomposer.org/doc/00-intro.md#installation-linux-unix-osx) - preferably, globally.
2. Require Fortress, either by running `php composer.phar require alexweissman/fortress`, or by creating a `composer.json` file:

```
{
    "require": {
        "php": ">=5.4.0",
        "userfrosting/fortress": "2.0"
    }
}
```

and running `composer install`.

3. Include the `vendor/autoload.php` file in your project.  For an example of how this can be done, see `fortress/config-fortress.php`.

## Usage

### Translator object

Fortress requires a `MessageTranslator` (see [i18n](https://github.com/userfrosting/i18n)) object to translate message tokens that may appear in rules:

```
// Create a message translator
$translator = new UserFrosting\I18n\MessageTranslator();
// Set the translation paths
$translator->setTranslationTable("locale/en_US.php");
$translator->setDefaultTable("locale/en_US.php");
```

### Request schema

Then, you can load a JSON schema file containing the rules.  For example, the `schema.json` file we demonstrated above:

```
// Load the request schema
$schema = new UserFrosting\Fortress\RequestSchema("schema/forms/register.json");
```

You can add additional validation rules to a schema at runtime, if you wish:

```
$schema->addValidator("puppies", "required");

$schema->addValidator("minions", "range", [
    "min" => 0,
    "max" => 20,
    "message" => "Not enough minions"
]);

$schema->addValidator("email", "length", [
    "min" => 1,
    "max" => 100,
    "message" => "ACCOUNT_EMAIL_CHAR_LIMIT"
]);
```

### Data transformation

The data transformer performs the following tasks:

1. Whitelisting of input array against the schema.  By default, any parameters not listed in the schema will be filtered out.  Other options are "error" and "skip".
2. Perform a series of transformations on the input data.  For example, `trim` or `purify`.
3. Set any default values for fields in the schema which are not present in the input array.


```
$post = [
    "puppies" => "<script>I'm definitely really a puppy  </script>0  ",
    "horses" => "seven pretty horses"
];

$transformer = new \UserFrosting\Fortress\RequestDataTransformer($schema);

// Transform, and print transformed data for demo purposes
$transformedData = $transformer->transform($post, "skip");

echo "<h2>Transformed data</h2>";
echo "<pre>";
print_r($transformedData);
echo "</pre>";
```

### Server-side data validation

When processing a POST request, for example, you should create a `ServerSideValidator` object with the schema.  Then, call `validate` on the input array.  `validate` will return false if any of the rules are failed.  Call `errors` to get the list of generated error messages.  You might want to store these error messages to a flash messaging system so they can be shown to the user.

```
$validator = new \UserFrosting\Fortress\ServerSideValidator($schema, $translator);

if (!$validator->validate($transformedData)) {
    echo "<h2>Validation results</h2>";
    echo "<pre>";
    print_r($validator->errors());
    echo "</pre>";
}
```

### Client-side data validation

When generating a page or form, you will use one of the `Adapter` classes to generate a compatible set of rules from your WDVSS schema:

```
// Test client validators
$clientVal = new \UserFrosting\Fortress\Adapter\JqueryValidationAdapter($schema, $translator);
echo "<h2>Client-side validation schema (JSON)</h2>";
echo "<pre>";
print_r($clientVal->rules());
echo "</pre>";
```

### Message tokens

The `message` for a rule can be either a plain string, or a [translatable message token](https://github.com/userfrosting/i18n).

In the definitions of translatable message tokens, the keyword "self" is reserved to refer to the name of the field being validated.  Thus, a message like this:

"MIN_LENGTH" => "The field '{{self}}' must be at least {{min}} characters long"

for a field defined as:

```
"tagline": {
    "validators" : {
        "length" : {
            "min" : 10,
            "message" : "MIN_LENGTH"
        }
    }
}
```

Would translate to:

 "The field 'tagline' must be at least 10 characters long"
 
### Limit rules to server or client only

Sometimes, you only want a validation rule to be applied server-side but not in Javascript on the client side, or vice versa.  For example, there may be forms that contain hidden data that needs to be validated on the server-side, but is not directly manipulated by the user in the browser. Thus, these fields would not need client-side validation rules.

Alternatively, there might be fields that appear in the form that should be validated for the sake of user experience, but are not actually used by (or even sent to) the server.

To accomplish this, each validation rule can now accept a `domain` property.  Setting to "server" will have it only applied server-side.  Setting to "client" will have it only appear in the client-side rules.  If not specified, rules will be applied both server- and client-side by default.  You can also set this explicitly with the value "both". 
 
## TODO
 
 - phpunit tests
